Chapter: Peclorol Region
INTRODUCTION
The pectoral region lies on the front of the chest. It essentially consists of structures which connect the upper limb to the anterolateral chest wall. Mammary gland lies in this region.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
The following features of the pectoral region can be seen or felt on the surface of body.
1 The clavicle lies horizontally at the root of the neck, separating it from the front of the chest. The bone is subcutaneous, and therefore, palpable, throughout its length. Medially, it articulates with the sternum at the sternoclavicular joint, and laterally with the acromion at the acromioclavicular joint. Both the joints are palpable because of the upward projecting ends of the clavicle (Fig. 3.1). The sternoclavicular joint may be masked by the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
2 The jugular notch (interclavicular or suprasternal notch) lies between the medial ends of the clavicles, at the superior border of the manubrium sterni.
3 The sternal angle (angle of Louis) is felt as a transverse ridge about 5 cm below the jugular notch (Fig. 3.1). It marks the manubriosternal joint.
Laterally, on either side, the second costal cartilage joins the sternum at this level. The sternal angle thus serves as a landmark for identification of the second rib. Other ribs can be identified by counting downwards from the second rib.
4 The epigastric fossa (pit of the stomach) is the depression in the infrasternal angle. The fossa overlies the xiphoid process, and is bounded on each side by the seventh costal cartilage.
5 The nipple is markedly variable in position in females. In males, and in immature females, it usually lies in the fourth intercostal space just medial to the midclavicular line; or 10 cm from the midsternal line. In fact, the position of the nipple is variable even in males.
6 The midclavicular line passes vertically through the middle of clavicle the tip of the ninth costal cartilage and the midinguinal point.
7 The infraclavicular fossa (deltopectoral triangle) is a triangular depression below the junction of the lateral and middle thirds of the clavicle. It is bounded medially by the pectoralis major, laterally by the anterior fibres of the deltoid, and superiorly by the clavicle.
8 The tip of the coracoid process of the scapula lies
2-3 cm below the clavicle, overlapped by the anterior fibres of the deltoid. It can be felt on deep palpation just lateral to the infraclavicular fossa.
9 The acromion of the scapula (acron = summit; omos =
shoulder) is a flattened piece of bone that lies subcutaneously forming the top of the shoulder. The posterior end of its lateral border is called the acromial angle, where it is continuous with the lower lip of the crest of the spine of the scapula. The anterior end of its medial border articulates with the clavicle at the acromioclavicular joint.
10 The deltoid is triangular muscle with its apex directed downwards. It forms the rounded contour of the shoulder, extending vertically from the acromion to the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.
11 The axilla (Latin armpit) is a pyramidal space between the arm and chest. When the arm is raised (abducted), the floor of the axilla rises, the anterior and posterior folds stand out, and the space becomes more prominent. The anterior axillary fold contains the lower border of the pectoralis major, and posterior axillary fold contains the tendon of the latissimus dorsi winding round the fleshy teres major.
The medial wall of the axilla is formed by the upper 4 ribs covered by the serratus anterior. The narrow lateral wall presents the upper part of the humerus covered by the short head of the biceps, and the coracobrachialis. Axillary arterial pulsations can be felt by pressing the artery against the humerus. The cords of the brachial plexus can also be rolled against the humerus. The head of the humerus can be felt by pressing the fingers upwards into the axilla.
12 The midaxillary line is a vertical line drawn midway between the anterior and posterior axillary folds.
SUPERFICIAL FASCIA
The superficial fascia (Latin a bond) of the pectoral region is visualised after the skin has been incised. It contains moderate amount of fat, and is continuous with that of surrounding regions. The mammary gland, which is well developed in females, is the most important of all contents of this fascia. The fibrous septa given off by the fascia support the lobes of the gland, and the skin covering the gland.
Contents
In addition to fat, the superficial fascia of the pectoral region contains the following.
1. Cutaneous nerves derived from the cervical plexus and from the intercostal nerves.ii. Cutaneous branches from the internal thoracic and
posterior intercostal arteries. iii. The platysma (Greek broad) iv. The breast.
DISSECTION
Mark the following points.
i. Centre of the suprasternal notch, ii. Xiphoid process,
iii. 7 o'clock position at the margin of areola, iv. Lateral end of clavicle (Fig. 3.2).
Give an incision vertically down from the first point to the second which joins the centre of the suprasternal notch to the iphoid process in the midsagittal plane.
From the lower end of this line, extend the incision upward and laterally till you reach to the third point on the areolar margin.
Encircle the areola and carry the incision upwards and laterally till the anterior axillary fold is reached.
Continue the line of incision downwards along the medial border of the upper arm till its junction of upper one-third and lower two-thirds. Extend this incision transversely across the arm.
Make another incision horizontally from the xiphoid process across the chest wall till the posterior axillary fold.
Lastly give horizontal incision from the centre of suprasternal notch to the lateral (acromial) end of the clavicle.
Reflect the two flaps of skin towards the upper limb.

Cutaneous Nerves of the Pectoral Region
The cutaneous nerves of the pectoral (Latin pectus, chest) region are as follows (Figs 3.3 and 3.4).
1 The medial, intermediate and lateral supraclavicular nerves are branches of the cervical plexus (C3, C4).
They supply the skin over the upper half of the deltoid and from the clavicle down to the second rib.
2 The anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the second to sixth intercostal nerves supply the skin below the level of the second rib. The inter-costobrachial nerve of T2 supplies the skin of the floor of the axilla and the upper half of the medial side of the arm (Fig. 3.3).
It is of interest to note that the area supplied by spinal nerves C3 and C4 directly meets the area supplied by spinal nerves T2 and T3. This is because of the fact that the intervening nerves (C5, C6, C7, C8 and T1) have been 'pulled away' to supply the upper limb. It may also be noted that normally the areas supplied by adjoining spinal nerves overlap, but because of what has been said above there is hardly any overlap between the areas supplied by C3 and C4 above and T2 and T3 below (Fig. 3.4).
Cutaneous Vessels
The cutaneous vessels are very small. The anterior cutaneous nerves are accompanied by the perforating branches of the internal thoracic artery. The second, third and fourth of these branches are large in females for scopyian the breast. The lat rut etan ous che es are
posterior intercostal arteries.
Platysma
The platysma (Greek broad) is a thin, broad sheet of subcutaneous muscle. The fibres of the muscle arise from the deep fascia covering the pectoralis major; run upwards and medially, crossing the clavicle and the side of the neck; and are inserted into the base of the mandible, and into skin over the posterior and lower part of the face. The platysma is supplied by a branch of the facial nerve. When the angle of the mouth is pulled down, the muscle contracts and wrinkles the skin of the neck. The platysma may protect the external jugular vein (which underlies the muscle) from external pressure.
BREAST/MAMMARY GLAND
The breast, or mammary gland (Latin breast) is the most important structure present in the pectoral region. Its anatomy is of great practical importance and has to be studied in detail.
The breast is found in both sexes, but is rudimentary in the male. It is well developed in the female after puberty. The breast is a modified sweat gland. It forms an important accessory organ of the female reproductive system, and provides nutrition to the newborn in the form of milk.
Situation
The breast lies in the superficial fascia of the pectoral region. It is divided into four quadrants, i.e. upper 260501o3pperlateraoner perateer me a cower lateral A small extension of the upper lateral quadrant called the axillary tail of Spence, passes through an opening in the deep fascia and lies in the axilla (Fig. 3.5). The opening is called foramen of Langer.
Extent
i. Vertically, it extends from the second to the sixth rib.
ii. Horizontally, it extends from the lateral border of the sternum to the midaxillary line.

Deep Relations
The deep surface of the breast is related to the following structures in that order (Fig. 3.6).
1 The breast lies on the deep fascia (pectoral fascia)
covering the pectoralis major.
2 Still deeper there are the parts of three muscles, namely the pectoralis major, the serratus anterior, and the external oblique muscle of the abdomen.
3 The breast is separated from the pectoral fascia by loose areolar tissue, called the retro-mammary space.
Because of the presence of this loose tissue, the normal breast can be moved freely over the pectoralis major.
Structure of the Breast
The structure of the breast may be conveniently studied by dividing it into the skin, the parenchyma, and the stroma.
Skin
It covers the gland and presents the following features.
1
A conical projection, called the nipple, is present just below the centre of the breast at the level of the fourth intercostal space 10 cm from the midline. The nipple is pierced by 15 to 20 lactiferous ducts. It contains circular and longitudinal smooth muscle fibres which can make the nipple stiff or flatten it, respectively. It has a few modified sweat and sebaceous glands. It is rich in nerve supply and has many sensory end organs at the termination of nerve fibres.
2 The skin surrounding the base of the nipple is pigmented and forms a circular area called the areola. 
This region is rich in modified sebaceous glands, particularly at its outer margin. These become enlarged during pregnancy and lactation to form raised tubercles of Montgomery. Oily secretions of these glands lubricate the nipple and areola, and prevent them from cracking during lactation. Apart from sebaceous glands, the areola also contains some sweat glands, and accessory mammary glands. The skin of the areola and nipple is devoid of hair, and there is no fat subjacent to it. Below the areola lie lactiferous sinus where stored milk is seen.
Parenchyma
It is a compound tubulo-alveolar gland which secretes milk. The gland consists of 15 to 20 lobes. Each lobe is a cluster of alveoli, and is drained by a lactiferous duct.
The lactiferous ducts converge towards the nipple and open on it. Near its termination each duct has a dilatation called a lactiferous sinus (Figs 3.7a and b).
Alveolar epithelium is cuboidal in the resting phase, and columnar during lactation. In distended alveoli, the cells may appear cuboidal due to stretching, but they are much larger than those in the resting phase.
The smaller ducts are lined by columnar epithelium, the larger ducts by two or more layers of cells, and the terminal parts of the lactiferous ducts by stratified squamous keratinised epithelium. The passage of the milk from the alveoli into and along the ducts is facilitated by contraction of myoepitheliocytes, which are found both around the alveoli and around the ducts, lying between the epithelium and the basement membrane.
Stroma
It forms the supporting framework of the gland. It is partly fibrous and partly fatty.
The fibrous stroma forms septa, known as the suspensory ligaments of Cooper, which anchor the skin and gland to the pectoral fascia (Fig. 3.7).
The fatty stroma forms the main bulk of the gland. It is distributed all over the breast, except beneath the areola and nipple.
Blood Supply
The mammary gland is extremely vascular. It is supplied by branches of the following arteries (Fig. 3.8).
1 Internal thoracic artery, a branch of the subclavian artery, through its perforating branches.
2 The lateral
thoracic, superior thoracic and
acromiothoracic (thoracoacromial) branches of the axillary artery.
3 Lateral branches of the posterior intercostal arteries.
The arteries converge on the breast and are distributed from the anterior surface. The posterior surface is relatively avascular.
The veins follow the arteries. They first converge towards the base of the nipple where they form an anastomotic venous circle, from where veins run in superficial and deep sets.
1 The superficial veins drain into the internal thoracic vein and into the superficial veins of the lower part of the neck.
2 The deep veins drain into the axillary and posterior intercostal veins.
Nerve Supply
The breast is supplied by the anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the 4th to 6th intercostal nerves.
The nerves convey sensory fibres to the skin, and autonomic fibres to smooth muscle and to blood vessels.
The nerves do not control the secretion of milk.

This region is rich in modified sebaceous glands, particularly at its outer margin. These become enlarged during pregnancy and lactation to form raised tubercles of Montgomery. Oily secretions of these glands lubricate the nipple and areola, and prevent them from cracking during lactation. Apart from sebaceous glands, the areola also contains some sweat glands, and accessory mammary glands. The skin of the areola and nipple is devoid of hair, and there is no fat subjacent to it. Below the areola lie lactiferous sinus where stored milk is seen.
Parenchyma
It is a compound tubulo-alveolar gland which secretes milk. The gland consists of 15 to 20 lobes. Each lobe is a cluster of alveoli, and is drained by a lactiferous duct.
The lactiferous ducts converge towards the nipple and open on it. Near its termination each duct has a dilatation called a lactiferous sinus (Figs 3.7a and b).
Alveolar epithelium is cuboidal in the resting phase, and columnar during lactation. In distended alveoli, the cells may appear cuboidal due to stretching, but they are much larger than those in the resting phase.
The smaller ducts are lined by columnar epithelium, the larger ducts by two or more layers of cells, and the terminal parts of the lactiferous ducts by stratified squamous keratinised epithelium. The passage of the milk from the alveoli into and along the ducts is facilitated by contraction of myoepitheliocytes, which are found both around the alveoli and around the ducts, lying between the epithelium and the basement membrane.
Stroma
It forms the supporting framework of the gland. It is partly fibrous and partly fatty.
The fibrous stroma forms septa, known as the suspensory ligaments of Cooper, which anchor the skin and gland to the pectoral fascia (Fig. 3.7).
The fatty stroma forms the main bulk of the gland. It is distributed all over the breast, except beneath the areola and nipple.
Blood Supply
The mammary gland is extremely vascular. It is supplied by branches of the following arteries (Fig. 3.8).
1 Internal thoracic artery, a branch of the subclavian artery, through its perforating branches.
2 The lateral thoracic, superior thoracic and acromiothoracic (thoracoacromial) branches of the axillary artery.
3 Lateral branches of the posterior intercostal arteries.
The arteries converge on the breast and are distributed from the anterior surface. The posterior surface is relatively avascular.
The veins follow the arteries. They first converge towards the base of the nipple where they form an anastomotic venous circle, from where veins run in superficial and deep sets.
1 The superficial veins drain into the internal thoracic vein and into the superficial veins of the lower part of the neck.
2 The deep veins drain into the axillary and posterior intercostal veins.
Nerve Supply
The breast is supplied by the anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the 4th to 6th intercostal nerves.
The nerves convey sensory fibres to the skin, and autonomic fibres to smooth muscle and to blood vessels.
The nerves do not control the secretion of milk.

Secretion is controlled by the hormone prolactin, secreted by the pars anterior of the hypophysis cerebri.
Lymphatic Drainage
Lymphatic drainage of the breast assumes great importance to the surgeon because carcinoma of the breast spreads mostly along lymphatics to the regional lymph nodes. The subject can be described under two heads, the lymph nodes, and the lymphatics.
Lymph Nodes
Groups of lymph nodes are shown in Fig. 3.9.
Lymph from the breast drains into the following
lymph nodes (Fig. 3.9).
1 The axillary lymph nodes, chiefly the anterior (or pectoral) group. The posterior, lateral, central and

apical groups of nodes also receive lymph from the breast either directly or indirectly.
2 The internal mammary (parasternal) nodes which lie along the internal thoracic vessels (Fig. 3.10)
3 Some lymph from the breast also reaches the supraclavicular nodes, the cephalic (deltopectoral) node, the posterior intercostal nodes (lying in front of the heads of the ribs), the subdiaphragmatic and subperitoneal lymph plexuses.
Lymphatic Vessels
1 The superficial lymphatics drain the skin over the breast except for the nipple and areola. The lymphatics pass radially to the surrounding lymph nodes (axillary, internal mammary, supraclavicular and cephalic).
2 The deep lymphatics drain the parenchyma of the breast.
They also drain the nipple and areola (Fig. 3.11).
Some further points of interest about the lymphatic drainage are as follows.
1 About 75% of the lymph from the breast drains into the axillary nodes; 20% into the internal mammary nodes; and 5% into the posterior intercostal nodes.
Among the axillary nodes, the lymphatics end mostly in the anterior group (closely related to the axillary tail) and partly in the posterior and apical groups.
Lymph from the anterior and posterior groups passes to the central and lateral groups, and through them to the apical group. Finally it reaches the supra-clavicular nodes.
2 The internal mammary nodes drain the lymph not only from the inner half of the breast, but from the outer half as well.

3 A plexus of lymph vessels is present deep to the areola. This is the subareolar plexus of Sappey (Fig. 3.11). Subareolar plexus and most of lymph from the breast drains into the anterior or pectoral group of lymph nodes.
4 The lymphatics from the deep surface of the breast pass through the pectoralis major muscle and the clavipectoral fascia to reach the apical nodes, and also to the internal mammary nodes (Fig. 3.12).
5 Lymphatics from the lower and inner quadrants of the breast may communicate with the subdiaphrag-matic and subperitoneal lymph plexuses after crossing the costal margin and then piercing the
anterior abdominal wall through the upper part of the linea alba.
Development of the Breast
1 The breast develops from an ectodermal thickening, called the mammary ridge, milk line, or line of Schultz (Fig. 3.13). This ridge extends from the axilla to the groin. It appears during the fourth week of intrauterine life, but in human beings, it disappears over most of its extent persisting only in the pectoral region. The gland is ectodermal, and the stroma mesodermal in origin.
2 The persisting part of the mammary ridge is converted into a mammary pit. Secondary buds (15-20) grow down from the floor of the pit. These buds divide and subdivide to form the lobes of the gland. The entire system is first solid, but is later canalised. At birth or later, the nipple is everted at the site of the original pit.
Growth of the mammary glands, at puberty, is caused by ostrogens. Apart from ostrogens, development of secretory alveoli is stimulated by progesterone and by the prolactin hormone of the hypophysis cerebri.
Developmental anomalies of the breast are:
a. Amastia (absence of the breast),
b. Athelia (absence of nipple),
c. Polymastia (supernumerary breasts),
d. Polythelia (supernumerary nipples),
e. Gynaecomastia (development of breasts in a male) which occurs in Klinefelter's syndrome.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The upper and outer quadrant of breast is a frequent site of carcinoma (cancer). Several anatomical facts are of importance in diagnosis and treatment of this condition. Abscesses may also form in the breast and may require drainage. The following facts are worthy of note.
• Incisions of breast are usually made radially to avoid cutting the lactiferous ducts (Fig. 3.9).
• Cancer cells may infiltrate the suspensory ligaments. The breast then becomes fixed.
Contraction of the ligaments can cause retraction or puckering (folding) of the skin (Fig. 3.14).
• Infiltration of lactiferous ducts and their consequent fibrosis can cause retraction of the nipple.
• Obstruction of superficial lymph vessels by cancer cells may produce oedema of the skin giving rise to an appearance like that of the skin of an orange (peau d orange appearance) (Fig. 3.15).
• Because of communications of the superficial lymphatics of the breast across the midline, cancer may spread from one breast to the other (Fig. 3.16).
• Because of communications of the lymph vessels with those in the abdomen, cancer of the breast may spread to the liver, and cancer cells may
'drop into the pelvis producing secondaries there (Fig. 3.16).
• Apart from the lymphatics, cancer may spread through the segmental veins. In this connection, it is important to know that the veins draining the breast communicate with the vertebral venous plexus of veins. Through these communications cancer can spread to the vertebrae and to the brain
• Self-examination of breasts (Fig. 3.18):
a. Inspect: Symmetry of breasts and nipples.
b. Change in colour of skin.
c. Retraction of nipple is a sign of cancer.
d. Discharge from nipple on squeezing it.
e. Palpate all four quadrants with palm of hand.
Note any palpable lump.
f. Raise the arm to feel lymph nodes in axilla.
• Mammogram may reveal cancerous mass
(Fig. 3.19).
• Fine needle aspiration cytology is safe and quick method of diagnosis of lesion of breast (Fig. 3.20).
• Retracted nipple is a sign of tumour in the breast.
• Size of mammary gland can be increased by putting an implant inside the gland.
• Cancer of the mammary glands is the most common cancer in females of all ages. It is more frequently seen in postmenopausal females due to lack of ostrogen hormones.
• Self-examination of the mammary gland is the only way for early diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
MUSCLES OF THE PECTORAL REGION
DISSECTION
Identify the extensive pectoralis major muscle in the pectoral region and the prominent deltoid muscle on the lateral aspect of the shoulder joint and upper arm.
Demarcate the deltopectoral groove by removing the deep fascia. Now identify the cephalic vein, a small artery and few lymph nodes in the groove.
Clean the fascia over the pectoralis major muscle and look for its attachments. Divide the clavicular head of the muscle and reflect it laterally. Medial and lateral pectoral nerves will be seen supplying the muscle.
Make a vertical incision 5 to 6 cm from the lateral border of sternum and reflect its sternocostal head laterally.
Identify the pectoralis minor muscle under the central part of the pectoralis major. Note clavipectoral fascia extending between pectoralis minor muscle and the clavicle bone.
Identify the structures piercing the clavipectoral fascia: These are cephalic vein, thoracoacromial artery and lateral pectoral nerve. If some fine vessels are also seen, these are the lymphatic channels.
Also, identify the serratus anterior muscle showing serrated digitations on the side of the chest wall.
Introduction
Muscles of the pectoral region are described in Tables 3.1 and 3.2. Some additional features are given below.
Pectoralis Major
Structures under Cover of Pectoralis Major
a. Bones and cartilages: Sternum, ribs, and costal cartilages.
b. Fascia: Clavipectoral.
c. Muscles: Subclavius, pectoralis minor, serratus anterior, intercostals and upper parts of the biceps brachii and coracobrachialis.
d. Vessels: Axillary.
e. Nerves: Cords of brachial plexus with their branches.
Bilaminar Tendon of Pectoralis Major
The muscle is inserted by a bilaminar tendon into the
AnaaNiAActhnintanhchamallnchlond aftho bamarc
muscle of the abdomen. Out of these only the fibres from the sternum and aponeurosis are twisted around the lower border of the rest of the muscle. The twisted fibres form the anterior axillary fold.
These fibres pass upwards and laterally to get inserted successively higher into the posterior lamina of the tendon. Fibres arising lowest, find an opportunity to get inserted the highest and form a crescentic fold which fuses with the capsule of the shoulder joint.
Clinical Testing
i. The clavicular head of the pectoralis major can be tested by attempting to lift a heavy table/rod. The sternocostal head can be tested by trying to depress
ii. The clavicular head is made prominent by flexing the arm to a right angle (Fig. 3.22). The sternocostal head can be tested by extending the flexed arm against resistance.
iii. Sternocostal head is made prominent by abducting arm to 60° and then touching the opposite hip (Fig. 3.23).
iv. Press the fists against each other (Fig. 3.24).
Clavipectoral Fascia
Clavipectoral fascia is a fibrous sheet situated deep to the clavicular portion of the pectoralis major muscle. It extends from the clavicle above to the axillary fascia below. Its upper part splits to enclose the subclavius 26030153 3.12). Www.sfiRshaview usehto the
investing layer of the deep cervical fascia and to the axillary sheath. Inferiorly, the clavipectoral fascia splits to enclose the pectoralis minor muscle (Fig. 3.25).
Medially it is attached to external intercostal muscle of upper intercostal spaces and laterally to coracoid process. Below this muscle, it continues as the suspensory ligament which is attached to the dome of the axillary fascia, and helps to keep it pulled up.
The clavipectoral fascia is pierced by the following structures.
i. Lateral pectoral nerve (Figs 3.12a and b). ii. Cephalic vein. iii. Thoracoacromial vessels.
iv. Lymphatics passing from the breast and pectoral region to the apical group of axillary lymph nodes (Fig. 3.12a).
Serratus Anterior
Serratus anterior muscle is not strictly muscle of the pectoral region, but it is convenient to consider it here.
Origin
Serratus anterior muscle arises by eight digitations from the upper eight ribs in the midaxillary plane and from the fascia covering the intervening intercostal muscles (Fig. 3.26).
Insertion
The muscle is inserted into the costal surface of the scapula along its medial border.
The first digitation is inserted from the superior angle
to the root of the spine.
The next two digitations are inserted lower down
on the medial border.
The lower five digitations are inserted into a large
triangular area over the inferior angle.Nerve Supply
The nerve to the serratus anterior is a branch of the brachial plexus. It arises from roots C5, C6 and C7 and is also called long thoracic nerve.
Actions
1 Along with the pectoralis minor, the muscle pulls the scapula forwards around the chest wall to protract the upper limb (in pushing and punching movements) (Fig. 3.27).

2 The fibres inserted into the inferior angle of the scapula pull it forwards and rotate the scapula so that the glenoid cavity is turned upwards. In this action, the serratus anterior is helped by the trapezius which pulls the acromion upwards and backwards (see Fig. 10.6).
3 The muscle steadies the scapula during weight carrying.
4 It helps in forced inspiration.
Additional Features
1 Paralysis of the serratus anterior produces 'winging of scapula' in which the inferior angle and the medial border of the scapula are unduly prominent. The patient is unable to do any pushing action, nor can he raise his arm above the head. Any attempt to do these movements makes the inferior angle of the scapula still more prominent.
2
Clinical testing: Forward pressure with the hands against a wall, or against resistance offered by the examiner, makes the medial border and the inferior angle of the scapula prominent (winging of scapula) if the serratus anterior is paralysed (see Fig. 2.12).
Mnemonics
Branches of any artery/nerve M-CAT
M-Muscular
C- Cutaneous
A -Articular
T- Terminal
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Pectoralis major forms part of the bed for the mammary gland 75% of lymph from mammary gland drains into axillary, 25% into parasternal and 5% into intercostal lymph nodes.
• The sternocostal head of pectoralis major causes extension of the flexed arm against resistance.
• Pectoralis minor divides the axillary artery into three parts.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A 45-year-old women complained of a firm painless mass in the upper lateral quadrant of her left breast.
The nipple was also raised. Axillary lymph nodes were palpable and firm. It was diagnosed as cancer breast.
• Where does the lymph from upper lateral quadrant drain?
• What causes the retraction of the nipple?
Ans: The lymph from the upper lateral quadrant